---
layout: post
title:  "ELI5: Cryptography - ElGamal"
date:   2019-03-26 13:07:28 +0200
tags: [cryptography elgamal discrete logarithm eli5]
---


# Overview

    "If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough" - Einstein

ElGamal is a public key cryptosystem that is used in [encryption](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ElGamal_encryption) , [digital signature](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ElGamal_signature_scheme) and homomorphic cryptography.

Here is my take in 12 lines of Python code:

     1  p = 7
     2  g = [x for x in range(1, p) if len(set([x**i % p for i in range(1, p)])) == p-1][0]
     3  k = 4
     4  t = g**k % p
     5  m = 6
     6  import random
     7  r = random.randint(1, p-1)
     8  c1 = g**r % p
     9  c2 = (t**r * m) % p
    10  inv_k = p - 1 - k
    11  inv_c1 = c1**inv_k % p
    12  message = c2 * inv_c1 % p
    13  print "YOU ARE A CRYPTOSTAR!" if message == m else "ERROR"

    YOU ARE A CRYPTOSTAR!

Besides line #2 that involves an algorithm to find the generator \`g\` and line #10 that calculates the additive inverse of private key \`k\`, everything else is just modular multiplication and exponentiation.

Interested in more details and line by line explanations? please read on.


# Discrete logarithm trapdoor

First thing first, lets pick a prime number:

    1  p = 7

For the prime number above we need to find the generator \`g\` that defines a [cyclic group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclic_group) which in theory is a little bit involved but in simple terms the generator is a specific number that returns unique values for each exponent between \`1\` and \`p-1\` where \`p-1\` is called the order of the cyclic group.

Lets take a few examples and see how it looks like: pick \`2\` as generator:

    print [2**i % p for i in range(1, p)]

    [2, 4, 1, 2, 4, 1]

We can easily see that returning values are not unique, lets pick \`3\` as generator:

    print [3**i % p for i in range(1, p)]

    [3, 2, 6, 4, 5, 1]

BINGO! returning values are unique and we've found our generator.

The line below is just a brute force algorithm that finds multiple generators of order \`p-1\` but only takes the first one that is found.

    2  g = [x for x in range(1, p) if len(set([x**i % p for i in range(1, p)])) == p-1][0]

Now is time to pick a private key \`k\` between \`1\` and \`p-1\`, execute the trapdoor function and calculate \`t\` value:

    3  k = 4
    4  t = g**k % p

The line #4 is the secret sauce of ElGamal cryptography, the trapdoor function called [**the discrete logarithm**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrete_logarithm) which says that for given \`g\` and \`t\` values it is **infeasible** to calculate the private key \`k\` when working with very large numbers.

The \`p, g and t\` form the public key and will be used in encryption below, while \`k\` is kept secret.


# Message encryption

\`m\` is the message that we want to encrypt and \`r\` is a random number between \`1\` and \`p-1\`:

    5  m = 6
    6  import random
    7  r = random.randint(1, p-1)
    8  c1 = g**r % p
    9  c2 = (t**r * m) % p

\`c1, c2\` are the encrypted ciphers that will be used to decrypt the original message.


# Message decryption

To decrypt the original message we need apply the following formula:

\`message = c2 / c1<sup>k</sup> mod p\`

The problem is that division is not an operation defined for finite fields but multiplication is and we can re-write it using multiplication / exponentiation operations only:

\`message = c2 \* c1<sup>inv</sup><sub>k</sub> mod p\`

\`inv<sub>k</sub>\` is called [additive inverse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Additive_inverse)  of \`k\` over [finite field](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_field) 'p' where \`k + inv<sub>k</sub> mod p = 0\` is valid.
We can brute force and find it but there is a simpler way: if \`k < p\` (which it is) then \`inv<sub>k</sub> = p - 1 - k\`.

    10  inv_k = p - 1 - k
    11  inv_c1 = c1**inv_k % p
    12  message = c2 * inv_c1 % p
    13  print "YOU ARE A CRYPTOSTAR!" if message == m else "ERROR"

    YOU ARE A CRYPTOSTAR!


# Intuition

Why this magic works the way it works?

    1  message == (c2 * inv_c1) % p
    2  message == (c2 * c1**(p-1-k)) % p
    3  message == (t**r * m * (g**r)**(p-1-k)) % p
    4  message == ((g**k)**r * m * (g**r)**(p-1-k)) % p
    5  message == (g**(k*r) * m * (g**(r*(p-1-k)))) % p
    6  message == (g**(k*r) * m * g**(r*(p-1)) * g**(-r*k)) % p

Lets do the math backwards:

1.  start with last decryption formula and substitute inverses \`inv<sub>c1</sub>\` and \`inv<sub>k</sub>\`
2.  substitute ciphers \`c1\` and \`c2\`
3.  substitute trapdoor \`t\`
4.  apply exponentiation power rule \`(a<sup>b</sup>)<sup>c</sup> = a<sup>(b\*c)</sup>\`
5.  distribute the exponent \`r\`
6.  - \`g\*\*(r\*(p-1))\` is 1 because of [Euler's theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler%2527s_theorem) and [Lagrange's theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagrange%2527s_theorem_(group_theory))
    -   \`g\*\*(k\*r)\` terms reduces each other

Check if the intuition is valid by substituting with numbers: generator \`g\` is 3, private key \`k\` is 4, random number \`r\` is 5 and message \`m\` is 6:

    print "MAGIC" if 6 == (3**(4*5) * 6 * 3**(5*(7-1)) * 3**(-5*4)) % 7 else "ERROR"

    MAGIC
